uh today as you were saying i'm gonna be
talking about websockets
and we're gonna be talking about it from
sort of a beginner's standpoint so
someone who's never actually really used
it more has sort of like heard of what
websockets is but has never actually
gone to the effort of actually using it
in one of their projects
so a bit about me
i'm don misik that's my name
i'm a full-time associate developer at
weistec currently
i study at uts doing the bit co-op
scholarship so that's the bachelor of
information technology
i spoke at pycon last year some of you
might have been at my talk
and i did a bit of data science work
at the anu last year as well and so i'm
18 years old and i'm obviously from
canberra and have recently moved up here
to study
um and to give you guys a bit of
structure
about what we're going to be going
through today
we're going to sort of start off with a
basic low-level understanding of some of
the protocols which we're going to be
talking about today sort of to get an
idea of where everything
sits in the whole it world
we're going to go over some of the use
cases and the applications which you
might find using websockets
and i'm going to go over some of the
previous technologies
which might be used in place of
websockets since it's still quite
relatively new
and we'll go a bit about the browser
support and the characteristics of
websockets as a protocol
and how fast it is in comparison to
other implementations
and of course what you're here for is
the python aspect of it so we're going
to go over
how python has a role to play with it
and how easy it is to do things with
websockets with python
and just a quick note at the end we're
going to go quickly over how deploying
websockets works over the web
so to get into it we're going to start
off with a pretty contrived example and
so anyone who's done any sort of
networking or taking any networking
courses would have seen something
similar to this
you probably would have seen something
called the osi networking layers um so
this is the internet protocol suite
and this is sort of just to get an idea
of where everything sits
relative to each other so i'm going to
start off from the bottom
you'll see the transport layer
so these are things which
define the way that data packets are
transferred over the web right so these
are things such as tcp and udp
and so tcp guarantees that
any packet that you send over the web
will reach its destination in the same
order which they were sent right and it
does this by acknowledging
um the packet
once it's reached its destination so say
i want to send a packet to a web server
tcp guarantees that all of my packets
will get there
and i want to mention that udp the less
important one to tcp
is a bit more careless and it doesn't
really care about this guarantee of
order and it's generally used for things
like
streaming video data where we don't care
if we lose some of the packets on the
way
and so tcp is sort of the underlying
transport layer
behind a lot of the things i'm gonna be
talking about today and so then you move
up to the next stage which is the
internet layer uh so this is things uh
like ipv4 and ipv6 which define the
addresses which packets are sent right
so everyone has an ip address you've
probably heard of this in any um
regards
it's it's pretty much where data is sent
on the web
and so we then get to the application
layer which is sort of the top level
layer and this is where http websockets
and the rest of them all sit um this is
the sort of stuff that you guys might
interface with when uh actually
developing things
now again i want to uh admit that this
is a very contrived example so take this
um layers in with like a grain of salt
i would suggest if you want to do a
further reading into where everything
sits to either google the
osi layer model
or just looking into any networking
courses that you can
now i'm going to start off basic um just
to get everyone sort of up to speed and
you probably all know what http is but
for those that don't um
it's pretty much this request model
where a client
sends a request to a server
the server then processes that request
and then responds with like anything so
right we it could be a html page it
could be anything
and so generally you type in a url the
client is that browser that sends that
request
and the server does the processing so
that could be anything and in our cases
this is generally a web application like
flask or django
and then it returns a response
okay
so i'm going to be talking a bit about
what http is and a bit of the
characteristics behind it so you can
sort of understand where http and
websockets sit relative to each other
so http stands for hypertext transfer
protocol
and it's a stateless protocol which
means uh after the initial request is
done
that's it the
the channel between the client the
server is completely lost after this
initial request right and so i like to
think of it as flipping a coin you flip
a coin once and you get your result
heads or tails and if you flip it again
that result doesn't have anything to do
with the previous result right so the
connection
is completely lost after that initial
request
in the http model clients who are
requesting data have to specify an
action so that's either a get post put
or delete
this just tells the server what they
want to do so a get request is
retrieving some data a post request is
making something new on the server
a put request is replacing something uh
if it does exist like a resource on the
server or creating a new one and the
delete one is deleting a resource on the
server
and these things
these methods and
characteristics are all put into a thing
called a header
which is sent over the web
to tell the server what it wants it to
do right and the server also responds
with this header
so i'm just going to quickly give you a
quick example
of a basic
http request
and i'm just going to show you how you
can find these headers and
look at what these things look like so
if you open up any web page like my
awesome web page here
um if you open up the inspect tools and
go into the networks tab
and then you can have a look down here
at all the requests you've made to the
server
and if you can click on that you can
look in greater detail at what the
request is actually doing
so in a general sense you have all of
the
um chrome that does this nicely and it
sort of gets the data that you will
probably want to look at at the top and
then it gives you more detail beneath
right and so you can
view the url which you might want to
request so i've requested that url
and i specified that i wanted to get
that web page
and then the server responded with a 200
ok response which means that my response
was valid and it returned this data so
you can also look in greater detail into
the request and the response headers
down here by just clicking view source
and you can look at exactly what headers
were sent up in the web now a lot of you
who have done web work probably have
interface with this but i thought i
might start off and show you exactly
where you should be looking for this
sort of data now there's a couple other
tabs which might be useful when
inspecting this sort of stuff
like the response tab so you can see
that the server responded
with a html page and all my browser's
done has loaded that page
and then you have a timing page which
also
shows you how long it took to download
all the data for this page
cool so in 2005 uh we realized that that
model wasn't
really what we wanted we wanted the web
to be able to do more than just respond
with some data okay
and so we invented this technology known
as ajax which stands for asynchronous
javascript and xml okay
and so what this allowed us to do is
asynchronously send data to the server
after the initial request so
as you can see with the model the client
sends the initial request for the html
page it gets responded with that and
then it can continue to make requests um
after that
and that did a lot of cool things for us
so we could do a whole range of new
things with that
and i'm going to show you another quick
example just to sort of stick with that
um explain an example type thing
so you guys can get used to looking at
headers
in the inspect tab so
this is just a basic page which where
you click the button and it makes an
ajax request to an api
and the api responds with some data so
if i click this
you'll see i'll make a request i'll just
sort of make the headers tab a little
bit
smaller
um
and so what i've done here is just
printed out what the request is so i did
a get method to this url
and i went to that api
okay and then that responded with
a greeting
just this arbitrary grading which i
created
and this is great right so we could do
these things now where we do the initial
request
and then we can get more data from the
server so if we want to grab
information we can just ask the server
for it and it's a really cool thing we
don't have to refresh the page and we
can do a whole lot of things
but what happens when you want to do
something which is a bit
more
real time okay
what if i've got something like a feed
or a facebook feed or a chat application
right where i want users to be able to
instantly in real time be able to talk
to each other
okay
imagine if
say a facebook wall or a chat requires
you to press get all posts to see the
posts of your friends you you wouldn't
want to be able to sit there the whole
time pressing get all posts
the whole day
looking for new things
i'm sorry
um but you get the point right you don't
want to sit there the whole day pressing
get all posts but if you if you did it's
i guess it would work and this this
model
could work for certain applications but
for stuff that we want to be real-time
it's not the ideal thing
and so ideally
what we want is a model where you can
make a request and get a response for
the initial page and then if the server
happens to have some new data
in its events it can send that data back
down to me as you can see sort of by the
model
it shows when there's any new data it
can send it down right
so in the case of a chat application if
i'm sending a message to a group chat
with all my friends
the server will get that message and
then about okay i've got this message
let me send it to all the people that
want to know about that message
and if they're connected to this the
server can then send that message to
everyone that's connected
so that's what websockets does right um
websockets is built to solve that
inherent problem with http and to
develop that dual channel right so what
websockets does is it defines this fully
duplex bi-directional communication
channel between the client and the
server i know that's a whole lot of
jargon but pretty much it means that the
client and the server can talk in real
time without having to continuously make
requests so
what it does is
it if you want to do web sockets over
the web you send a header to the server
saying okay i want to upgrade from http
to web sockets
and it uses that same tcp connection
that it originally established loading
the page
and the server's like okay let's upgrade
once this upgrade is done
those two
the client and server can continuously
send data back and forth with each other
without the overhead which http might
bring with it and we're going to talk a
bit a bit about the
performance benefits you can have by
removing uh headers from
requests
so essentially one of the great things
about it is it's really easy to
implement and we'll get into some of the
details with that soon and it's
standardized and it's been standardized
for quite a while so i don't understand
why people
aren't really implementing it more than
they are
and as the last point says there the
headers are only sent once so in that
initial handshake where the server and
the client agree to upgrade to
websockets that's the only
headers that are sent the rest is
just sending data back and forth and so
you don't have that
overhead
when sending data
so i'm going to sort of go over a brief
example again
with that same feed idea
um feel free to go on this if you want
we can try crash my server
and so
i'm going to sort of show you how you
can inspect them um and sort of see what
a websocket looks like so if you want
you can again feel free to go on there
and post a message so i could be like
okay my name's dion and i could be like
hey
i can make that post okay and so what's
happening here is i've made the initial
request to the server we've upgraded our
connection
i've sent my message
and the server saved that message to
some database on the side and then it
sent that message out to anyone that's
connected
okay
and if we look at the
websockets headers which you can find by
going
in this
little tab
you can see this initial header
so i'll just quickly
drag that open it's not
okay
um
so you see the initial headers um which
happened with that upgrade connection so
you can see
the status code from the server was okay
we're going to switch protocols to web
sockets
and so if you want to look further into
please be reasonable
did i just see your drop tables
[Music]
okay so if you want to look more into
what's actually going on behind the
scenes you can go into this little tab
called the frames tab
um and you can see everything which is
happening um behind the scenes so you
can see in my case all that's happening
for me is i've been i've upgraded my
connection to websockets and now all i'm
doing is receiving that data from the
server so when you guys are making those
posts it's going up into the server
saving them to the database and then
sending them back to me
and you can see that by looking at these
here right so
um you could you can see exactly what
the event was so i made an event on my
client saying add to wall which um does
what it says and it just adds that text
to the wall and you can see the the data
that came with it right so you have um
the username of the person that sent it
um and the message that came with it as
well
and this probably isn't the best
implementation of it but it sort of just
um
defines
jesus
it defines that um that connection
okay so we'll go away from that
i also do apologize in advance um for
including all the um the curly braces in
my slides i didn't realize until
afterwards i just did it sort of as an
aesthetic thing
and then i was like wow i'm actually
presenting this to a bunch of python
people they probably don't know what
those are
anyway
so
a lot of people criticize web sockets
for its browser support
and we can now go ahead and say that
that is sort of a myth because
websockets is widely supported now in
all of the latest versions of the
browsers including ie which is good i
guess
if you still support that
and if you want to do further reading
and
find these sorts of things for other
things i'd urge you to go to this
website can i use dot com
most web developers who've done any
front-end stuff would probably
interface with that but it's just a nice
little way of seeing if
you can use it
okay so i mentioned earlier that we're
going to be talking about other
technologies used to achieve
quite similar real-time goals to what
websockets does
and you may have heard of these
technologies before and i'm not trying
to de-credit them because they still are
used today
but i'm saying websockets can do all
this but it's a more standard way
okay so
there are these two things called
polling and long polling okay so polling
is sending an ajax request any x number
of seconds so i could tell my my client
every five seconds make a request to the
server for some new data
now
my work actually does something like
this right and
it's not probably the best way to do
things
but it does work so you will get some
sense of real time i guess because you
will be getting data every x amount of
seconds
and it's sort of a workaround to not
having to use that websocket and it
should be used um
sometimes when you only want to be
receiving data on intervals
we also came up with another way of
doing this called long polling now this
is still i think widely used today from
what i can see and if you look at a lot
of applications where you'd expect
websockets to be used like for example a
chat um you'll often see that you won't
be able to inspect any web soccer
headers and that's because people still
do use this long polling
technique
you might have also heard this referred
to as comment programming but
essentially what it does is it makes a
request to the server and it tells the
server not to close that request until
it has any new data
so it keeps that connection open until
the server finds something to give it
and then after it gives it back
the client is just like okay i'm going
to send you another request to do the
same thing
and by doing that you sort of achieve
that goal of having dual connection
between a client and a server
and there are upsides to it and
downsides to it and we'll get onto that
quite soon
another way of doing it
is called server events um or service
events sorry um and it uses this thing
called the event source api
to send events from the server and it's
not truly bidirectional because
it's really based from the server
sending it to the client not an
interaction between the two of them and
that's sort of the distinction between
them and websockets where websockets
expect both the client and server to
continuously communicate
this expects the client to sometimes
communicate with a server but mainly for
it to be server data being sent back
and so this generally requires an event
loop or asynchronous server and one of
the downsides is you don't have that
binary message capability which you will
receive with websockets which supports
uh binary data
and one of the main upsides of this
method and i guess is the arguable thing
you might want to
consider when choosing to use web
sockets or not is
using this method allows you to co-exist
with existing technologies and when i
say that i'm saying
it works well with rest apis and with
things like oauth right so existing
technologies which use that
that model
now websockets can't really interface
with them properly and there's a bit of
an issue
trying to request from an api using
websockets so you've got to kind of
consider if you want to be using those
sorts of technologies and if
it's worth the trade-off
now the browser support for service and
events isn't as good as web sockets
which is funny
it's pretty much everything except for
internet explorer
but that can also be polyfilled so i
guess it's arguable that you can pretty
much use web circuits or these in
replace of each other
the intended use case of websockets
this is sort of a topic which is i guess
controversial so i don't want to make my
opinion um change this
but one of the things i want to get
clear to you guys is web sockets is not
a complete replacement for http right
websockets is an upgrade we saw earlier
with the headers it's it's not a
replacement for the http model but it's
more an upgrade for that channel
so
you can't just replace http to use this
because http provides you a number of
benefits
which you won't receive with just native
uh websockets like for example as i
mentioned on the slide
automatic caching um and you can
communicate with those other
technologies like rest and oauth
and one of the things that's often
another critical point about websockets
is
load balancing
the servers
is often quite hard
with the websocket protocol and it makes
the whole implementation of deployment a
little bit more complicated than just
doing a http server
and so the intended use case for
websockets is generally things
where you need that full duplex client
server interaction so it's things where
you're doing things in real time like
creating maybe a game on the web
chatting applications where you've
constantly got that interaction
anything which needs that low latency
real-time connection over the web
okay so we're going to get into some of
the clients which are used to interface
with websockets so these are the things
which
you use to talk to a server and the
server either upgrades or doesn't
upgrade with you and i'll get into what
that means in a second so
these clients are built in a lot of
different languages including python
which is an upside
and even microplay and arduino have them
which is kind of cool so if you're into
iot sort of things you can use web
sockets which is awesome so if you want
to control
any iot devices you can
create that websocket connection with a
web browser so for example if i wanted
to interface with uh one of my iot
devices let's say some kind of robot or
something i could control it
using
my web browser
with a websocket connection
and so clients which
interface with websockets aren't
necessarily
web browsers like we'd expect but the
most popular implementation of these
clients are built in javascript
and are used as web clients
and obviously they require the server to
be able to interface with web sockets um
if a client tries to request an upgrade
with a server that doesn't support it
it'll obviously respond with an error
and you won't get that upgrade
and if you want to read more into sort
of clients and looking for the right one
that you might want to use for in your
projects
i'd consider looking at socket i o which
i'm going to go into a lot more depth in
a second
and looking into just some of the
websocket libraries just by doing a
simple google search for a websocket
client and if obviously you guys are
python people so i'd assume you'd be
looking for things in python and those
do exist
so for this example i'm going to be
showing you um the native websocket
support which is in javascript um and
i'm going to show you a bit of code sort
of work through how quite easy it is to
create a client which can interface with
a websocket server
so in this example um
we start off with the initial socket
connection which is just a new websocket
uh object and again i'm sorry for
pushing javascript on you guys i know
you're not here for this um but you give
this this new websocket connection
and you define a ws
route
so for this example i'm connecting to my
local host
and then you have to define a couple of
uh functions so
the this socket object has an on open
event which means once the protocol has
been swapped and upgraded to web sockets
this function gets called right and so
in the example that i've got up on the
screen
it's just a lambda way of
dealing with that so
for example in my example i open that
connection
and then i send using socket.send i send
the string pyconau up to the server
and then
when the server sends something back to
me the socket on message is called
i just realized i don't have too much
time
so socket io is
another thing i want to also mention and
it's sort of the main thing i want to
push at you guys to use
this is a nicer way of interfacing with
websocket servers because it's
sort of like a jquery to javascript
right so it's sort of like this this
library that takes the native websockets
and makes a lot nicer and easier to use
right and so it includes things like
auto reconnection and fallbacks so say a
server and a client don't agree on the
handshake
what it does is it uses a fallback
mechanism
to use long polling instead which is
quite good if you want to support older
browsers um and it gives you that
ability to do that uh it also uh
as native websockets does handles
disconnection and connection and it
gives this ability to create these
things called namespaces which is sort
of like a group of
clients which
the server can talk to
and so a socket i o client-side code is
quite similar to what you saw before you
create that initial connection
and you give it the namespace as one of
the parameters to the url
you have a connect event
and you can also send events to
custom-made events right so the native
websockets can only send events to
a message event on the server
whereas this i can define custom events
to do that
and i'm going to skip over this slide
because i'm slowly running out of time
but there's a lot of support for python
servers which
do do this and i'm going to be using
flask for a lot of my examples which we
should hopefully fly through
but
there's a lot of different
implementations for using socket io
and it's really really quite easy so you
create a flask application most of you
might have used flask if you'd ever done
any web stuff with python
but it's as easy as wrapping the app
with the provided socket
object
and then creating a route which
takes in a
custom event name like for example my
sockets
um sorry this is actually an example for
native websockets
so this is where you're using that
native connection um and then socket io
is where you can do custom events and so
this name space allows me to address a
group of people let's say the name space
pycon so i get all the people that
connect to this namespace python and
then i can send messages back and forth
to anyone that's connected to that
python namespace which is really quite
cool for managing groups of people so
let's say you've got chat groups you can
use this namespace to achieve that
and also like i said before the
performance comparison between
websockets and just http
is quite big
so http requests they always send that
header whereas websockets don't
so after that initial connection is done
every other request is only framed by a
two byte uh header
frame i think it's called a frame
and it it's not as heavy as the multiple
kilobytes which a
http request might have
but then there's also that socket io
idea from before also does contribute to
adding latency to their websockets but
it's not as much as http might
i'm going to quickly go to a speed test
if i can
this is just on my local host and what
it does is
i enter a number of requests i want it
to perform
and it just does that so i just send in
a basic um string to either my
websocket endpoint or my api endpoint
and
you'll see how much quicker websockets
is in comparison to ajax
this isn't actually hosted on the on the
web because i wanted to take latency out
of it out of the equation but you can
see
it looks a bit small here cause it's in
milliseconds but you can imagine having
a thousand hundreds of thousands of
users connected to a connection all
doing these requests you can see how
that can quickly get quite expensive
now i was going to do a live demo but
i'm quickly out of time
i'm just going to quickly touch on
deploying these websockets
and so synchronous servers don't
generally have support for this so we
have to use libraries such as eventlet
and g event to monkey patch
some of the standard libraries in python
so synchronous just means that it it
uses blocking functions and using these
libraries unblocks it
um i'll go into more detail if anyone
wants to know about deploying it
afterwards because i think i've
literally got a minute
but
deploying websockets does add that
little extra layer of complexity and
doing them with asynchronous servers
makes your life a lot easier and that's
sort of the point i wanted to get across
so unfortunately i'm going to have to
wrap up early but if you do want to talk
more about this
feel free to
find me outside i'll probably be
loitering around for a little bit
and thank you for coming
[Music]
thank you dion as you can see he's very
enthusiastic about it so i'm sure he'll
answer your questions later on thank you